First dapp tutorial changes (#1388)
dfinity/portal: docs/tutorials/02_create_your_first_app/05_using-collections.md

---
sidebar_position: 5
title: Step 5 - Using collections
---

# Step 5 - Using collections

In this step we will add new variable `options` to the actor that will hold a list of the choices that users can vote for in the poll.

## Creating a "map"

> Each option is a string, what describes what the users are voting for. However, since we have multiple options in the poll we will need to store them in some data structure. We will use a collection called [`RBTree`](/motoko/main/base/RBTree.md) which is similar to "maps" or "dictionaries" in other languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each option is a string that describes what the user is voting for. However, since we have multiple options in the poll we will need to store them in some data structure. We will use a collection called [`RBTree`](/motoko/main/base/RBTree.md) which is similar to "maps" or "dictionaries" in other languages.
```

The collection will "map" option identifier (a string of type `Text`) to the option value (a natural number of type `Nat`). For example, we may have this list of options if we want to vote for our favorite programming language:

| id  | Vote Count |
| --- | ------ |
| "Motoko"   | 0 |
| "Rust"   |   0 |
| "TypeScript"   |  0 |
| "Python"   | 0     |

To use RBTree we need to import it. In addition, we will need to import the standard type [`Nat`](/motoko/main/base/Nat.md) to use some of the module's functions. So first let's add an import statement to the beginning of our file `main.mo`:
```motoko
import RBTree "mo:base/RBTree";
import Nat "mo:base/Nat";
```

Next we need to declare the variable of this type inside the actor:
```motoko
    var votes: RBTree.RBTree<Text, Nat> = RBTree.RBTree(Text.compare);
```

In this snippet we create a variable `votes`, whose type is `RBTree.RBTree<Text, Nat>`.

:::note

> The current version of Motoko makes collections declarations a bit verbose and difficut to understand for beginners. We are working to create a more elegant syntax.

Reviewer: This phrasing makes it feel like Motoko in its current state. I would phrase it more along the lines of "Future versions of Motoko will introduce usability enhancements in this area"

:::

## `getVotes` method

We need a method to query the current state of vote counts. Since the data will not be altered, the method can be a query.

Here's the code with comments inline:

```motoko
 // query the list of options and votes for each one
    // Example JSON that the frontend will get using the values above
    // [["Motoko","0"],["Python","0"],["Rust","0"],["TypeScript","0"]]
    public query func getVotes() : async [(Text, Nat)] {
        Iter.toArray(votes.entries())
    }; 
```

- The method returns an array. Array is a simple container that can hold multiple values.

> - The array element is a tuple, another container of fixed length that has a typed value on each of the position. For example, a tuple `(Text, Nat)` represents all potential values where the first elements is a antural number and the second element is a string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The array element is a tuple, another container of fixed length that has a typed value on each of the position. For example, a tuple `(Text, Nat)` represents all potential values where the first element is a natural number and the second element is a string.
```

- We use a class `Iter` that represents an iterator, a pointer-like data structure that allows the developer to move over another data stucture and see values one by one in a sequential manner.
-  The  statement `Iter.toArray(options.entries())` is executed in this sequence:
    1. `options.entries()` method produces an iterator of tuples `(Text, Nat)` that represent the map's values
    2. `Iter.toArray()` is a standard function that convers `Iter<(Text,Nat)>` to array of `(Text, Nat)`

> To make this method work, we also need to add a new import statement to the beginnign of the file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make this method work, we also need to add a new import statement to the beginning of the file:
```

    public func vote(option: Text) : async [(Text, Nat)] {

      //since ?Nat returns an optional...
      var current_votes_or_null : ?Nat = votes.get(option);
      //... we need to be explicit about what to do when it is null or a number so every case is taken care of
      let current_votes : Nat = switch current_votes_or_null {
        case null 0;
        case (?Nat) Nat;
      };

      //once we have the number, update the votes
      votes.put(option, current_votes + 1);
      Iter.toArray(votes.entries())
    };
```

## `resetVotes`  method
This method resets the state of the votes so every option goes back to 0. Here's the code:

```motoko
    //This methods reset the vote count for each option and and returns the updated hashmap
    // Example JSON that the frontend will get using the values above
    // [["Motoko","0"],["Python","0"],["Rust","0"],["TypeScript","0"]]
    public func resetVotes() : async [(Text, Nat)] {
      votes.put("Motoko", 0);
      votes.put("Rust", 0);
      votes.put("TypeScript", 0);
      votes.put("Python", 0);
      Iter.toArray(votes.entries())
    };
```

Comments about the implementation:

> - The method is a update since it updates the state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The method is an update call since it updates the state
```
